Personal information
====================

Toni Alatalo (antont)
Playsign Oy
MÃ¤kelininkatu 15
Finland
toni@playsign.net


Using Blender to create multi-user online apps with realXtend
=============================================================

We are using Blender for creating several kinds of multi-user online
applications on the open source realXtend platform. Work is on-going
to improve the toolchain and custom additions to Blender for fluent
authoring. Since last years demo using Blender 2.49, we have
implemented new toolset on 2.5 and released soon 10 versions of reX,
reaching 2.0 with the Tundra SDK in September 2010.

realXtend uses Ogre3D for graphics, Bullet for physics and has
integrated networking suitable for multiplayer games. There is also a
browser based WebSockets + WebGL client now, which can connect to the
same servers as the native client. Blender reX add-on can also connect
live to the same servers at the same time, so if you move an object in
Blender, you will see it move also in the WebGL view in your browser
in realtime.

We present several example cases, games and other applications. The
primary one is open source and with creative commons licensed models
-- the Chesapeake Bay project with a set of animals with walk and fly
animations, all made in Blender and free to use for non-commercial
purposes. The game logic is written in Javascript -- logic authoring
in connection with Blender is one of the areas where work was started
recently.

4. Technical needs
==================

Nothing special -- either a normal powerful computer, or a cable to
connect a laptop for demos.

5. Author biography
===================

6. URLs
=======
